[Music]
hey guys thanks for tuning into the keto
answers podcast I am your host dr.
Anthony Gustin and joining me this week
is dr. Thomas Seyfried doc here blew my
mind
there was a lot of information in this
one he has done so much work in the
field of cancer and using key nutrient
diet for cancer started researching
epilepsy and seizures
and that brought him to using ketogenic
diet and a whole bunch of different
things to treat cancer his approach is
very very different from standard of
care he does not think that anybody
should be using what he calls poison
chemotherapy for cancer treatment and he
thinks that there's a much much better
way so if you were interested in that I
was obviously so take a pen in paper and
get it out there's a lot of notes here
so many people are affected by this
stuff cancer rates we've mentioned in a
previous episode are one and two in men
in the u.s. now and one in three women
so in this and this is critically
important we're not solving the problems
to people like dr. safer here are a huge
part of the puzzle to try to move in the
right direction so tune in and I hope
you enjoy before we get to the episode I
wanted to chat about our sponsor perfect
keto perfect keto is all about making a
ketogenic diet healthy and accessible
with you reading all of our online
guides or articles or enjoying perfect
Kia's exogenous ketones or any other
keto friendly products everything you
need to make key to work for you is that
particular com I know what you're
thinking hey aren't you the founder of
perfect kiddo yep that's right and all
of my insanely high standards have been
put into making each and every product
my background is a functional medicine
clinician helps me craft the cleanest
and healthiest possible products and the
best information about the kids going to
diet head on over to perfectly calm to
learn anything you need to know about
the ketogenic diet and if you've never
tried any of our products before feel
free to use a code keto podcast for 20%
off your first order that being said
let's get into the show talk thank you
for joining us today know it's a
pleasure to be here before we go into
some of probably a little bit more in
depth topics here I just wanted to take
a step back and chat about your
background doing what makes you so
qualified in this topic yeah well you
know I'm a professor at Boston College I
wish I've been here now for about 33
years and before that I was at Yale
University
Department of Neurology for nine years
and I took that position as assistant a
postdoc and an assistant professor after
having received my PhD from the
University of Illinois in biochemical
genetics so we have done a lot of work
in the field of epilepsy in
neurodegenerative diseases like lipid
storage diseases tay-sachs disease arm
and then of course we have been working
on on the issue of cancer metabolism and
biochemistry parallel parallel with all
these other other studies that we do
great and so what I mean how did you go
from from studying epilepsy to cancer is
it just something that sort of popped up
is a problem to solve or like what was
the path that led you to that focus well
I mean we we had been studying cancer
parallel with epilepsy but four
different different fundamental reasons
our goal our work in cancer was mostly
looking at the the changes in cell
surface carbohydrates related to the
migration or invasion of tumor cells
where the work on epilepsy was we were
in the process of mapping genes and
looking at gene environmental
interactions it the the the the emerging
of the two came when one of my students
requested to attend a meeting in Seattle
Washington on ketogenic diets for
epilepsy and you know I had been aware
of ketogenic diets for epilepsy you know
for a long time and this is not a new
field that's it was started back in 1921
by Wilder at Mayo Clinic but for the
most part people were not excited about
ketogenic diets for anything until Jim
Abraham's and the Charlie foundation his
son Charlie had seizures and almost died
and then there was a small group at
Johns Hopkins University that are
friends of mine Jim Freeman the late Jim
Freeman and his associates were were
working with ketogenic diets for
epilepsy and of course we had a we had
one of the best epilepsy
models and in the mouse so one of my
students on her PhD project says why
don't we try to figure out how the how
the ketogenic diet works for two if we
could manage seizures in this particular
mouse that we had so I sent her out
there and and she met Jim Abramson's and
this was like the beginning of the
Charlie foundation's organization and
then meryl streep had done the the movie
first do no harm which was put on by Jim
Abrams and in honor of his son Charlie
to try to to try to bring the world
attention to this and you know when when
my student Marianna Totoro Nova came
back to the lab she said oh we have to
do this ketogenic diet stuff in the
epilepsy and we didn't put it on the
cancer models until we realized that the
that a major way the ketogenic diet
works is through calorie restriction and
we knew that calorie restriction could
also reduce tumor growth so we kind of
merged the two together you know we were
first interested in what calorie
restriction might do to the lipid
profiles of the tumor cells and then we
began to realize that calorie
restriction just the restriction just
cutting back the amount of calories that
the mouse aid had powerful effects on
the growth of the tumor so we kind of
shifted away from from epilepsy I mean
we spent a lot of time trying to figure
out how ketogenic diets could manage
epileptic seizures so we were deep into
the biochemical mechanisms and we still
really don't know to this day the exact
mechanisms by which ketogenic diets can
stop seizures we just know that it's
probably one of the most powerful ways
to stop epileptic seizures a lot of it
has to do with the levels of glucose and
the levels of ketones
but you have any lead theories as far as
what you think the mechanism is well III
think we don't we don't really know
because the neurons are and how they
work
electrically is a very complicated
complicated situation we knew one thing
and we published a major paper
to show that the that the therapeutic
success of ketogenic diets for epilepsy
were based largely on maintaining a
lower stable glucose level and we
published this and and many of my
friends in the epilepsy field began to
very carefully monitor glucose levels in
their in their clinical patient young
people population and they found that if
you can keep blood Sugar's low and
stable seizures and most of the children
were managed but every now and then the
child would grab a Coke or a piece of
cake or bread or whatever and it would
send the sugar high and they would have
breakthrough seizures almost so you
could manage a child for months and then
all of a sudden that if that child could
have a breakthrough seizure within
within minutes you know several minutes
they have an hour of having consumed
some sugary drink or food
so clearly the the long-term benefit was
like wiped out immediately and but then
of course the child would bring the
glo-coat glucose down and the seizures
would be modified and you know we did
all a lot of these basic research
findings in the mouse so we were quite
aware of the role of sugar glucose
actually and and and ketones you know
what was it the elevation of ketones the
lowering of course what are the
neurochemical mechanisms involved and
that's still under a very active
investigation has there been any
research done where levels of ketone
ketones have been available in the
bloodstream while a spike in glucose has
been there yeah and that was one of the
things that that it didn't clear the key
it where that when that when the child
took the drink it didn't clear ketones
out of the blood as quickly as the
elevation in glucose so you know you
have insulin surge you know you're under
a local o carbohydrate ketogenic diet
you're very you're extremely insulin
sensitive so when you take the sugar you
know insulin you know goes right up real
quick and you know that could be one of
the participatory events and the
breakthrough seizure we're not really
sure of all the details but as I said
this is a very active area of investing
but you didn't wipe out all the ketones
so and this is what we came later to
realize in cancer the same you know it
takes a while for the body to flush out
the ketones I mean it can happen over a
period of hours but generally the
ketones are still present so so we were
well I wrote a big review article and
the mechanisms by which ketogenic diets
could stop seizures and you know we had
been involved in a lot of this so our
background was clearly in how ketogenic
diets might be managing epilepsy and
then but you know at the same time we
began to shift these same kinds of diets
over to cancer bait and and the
mechanism for managing cancer is so much
more clear and understandable than it is
for how these how this meta key togetic
metabolic therapy works for epilepsy so
the cancer becomes clearly a disease
that can be effectively managed and
actually reduced prevented by this same
mechanism that manages seizures but the
same the same approach the mechanisms
are very different but the approach is
is similar so doing your research is
that when you came to the conclusion in
sort of planted your flag in the ground
row your book cancer as metabolic
disease or did you have that viewpoint
before you started this research no I
mean I when I I had no we had not worked
deeply in the cancer field as as far as
management we were doing years of basic
research on lipid biochemistry and
cancer cells which call basic research
you know what role do gangliosides play
in the growth of the tumor we weren't
looking
we had some drugs that we're going to
we're going in fact this is one of the
the main linkages is that we found a
drug that could block ganglioside
biosynthesis and in the in the in the
brains of tay-sachs disease mice and in
our cancer work we showed that this same
drug could really block ganglia side
biosynthesis so we said well you know
this might be a connection so we fed the
mice this drug and sure enough
the ganglia sides and the tumors went
down but the tumor shrunk tremendously
so the company that was interested in
this drug supported our research for
$200,000 to do a pilot study on how this
on how this drug might be reducing the
tumor growth was it through ganglia so
was it through a biochemical mechanism
or what but then we found that this drug
caused the mice to lose weight as a
matter of fact the drug blocked the
ability of the digestive system to
metabolize food so the food was kind of
collecting in the in the gut of these
mouse in the stomach and the intestines
and the mice were actually getting an
indirect calorie restriction they were
eating they were eating the food but
they couldn't digest it because the drug
was was blocked was blocking sook races
in the gut that are needed to break down
tight digest food so um you know we
didn't know at the time we didn't know
what was going on and then I said one of
my one of my colleagues said let's put a
put up control group in there let's
restrict the food intake and these mice
to match with the drug the body weight
reduction that the drug was causing and
it turned out that they both Shrunk the
tumor to the exact same degree so the
drug the drug had nothing to do with any
kind of a sexy biochemical mechanism it
was just causing the mice not to be able
to digest the food they ate so it was
clear that the the drug was working
through an indirect calorie restricted I
gotta cut and so at this point moving
over is that when you sort of had the a
ha moment start pulling thread a little
bit more here yeah well then we said you
know what could be causing this and we
went back and we found that otto warburg
had said a long time ago that you know
these cancer cells depend on glucose and
and if you and if you you know if you if
you target glucose or try to try to do
that what they he was more interested in
you know how cancer cells were growing
and it turned out to be a glucose
mediated mechanism and when you do
calorie restriction or therapeutic
fasting you're lowering blood sugar and
and and and we were able to link this
very very carefully to show that there
was a direct correlation between how
much blood how much sugar was in the
blood and how fast the tumors grew and
now this is we were the first to do this
this that now
been established for all kinds of human
cancers as I said most human cancers if
you want them to grow fast you get your
blood sugar up as high as you can
insulin and sugar drive those tumors
like crazy when you do calorie
restriction or fasting your lower
insulin and blood sugar and that that's
connected to a reduced rate of tumor
growth so so you can see that and then
we began to look more into what Otto
Warburg had actually said and we looked
at his papers and German and English and
we just went through the whole thing and
and then we began to find that all of
the things that he he had defined were
in fact correct and but most recently we
just published the paper with my
colleague Chris Toshi innopolis from the
Semmelweis University in Budapest
Hungary showing that the we've we've
just we've identified the missing link
in Warburg central theory and that is
they can also from an amine amino acids
and especially glutamine so the cancer
cell is simply now we know is simply a
fermenting or a cell ferments and if you
target the two fermentable fuels you can
eliminate the tumour cells and so for
people who aren't familiar with Otto
Warburg in his work
how would you maybe he doesn't really
understand a lot of has maybe a concept
that is in grainy muscles heads that
cancer is just a DNA damage thing I want
to be naked gets damaged the cell
proliferates indefinitely
so this is sort of a different way to
look at it well it's you know we have
now shown through nuclear transfer
experiments and all kinds of other
things that the DNA damage is a
downstream effect it's not the cause so
we know that now although to be honest
with you that's a very very difficult
pill a piece of information to swallow
on the part of a vast academic
pharmaceutical industry that banked
their whole existence onto this DNA
information which now we know is is
wrong fundamentally wrong because the
evidence that we have now to show that
cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease is overwhelming for those that
actually want to look at the research
the bottom line is that otto warburg was
absolutely correct in defining cancer as
a metabolic disease the problem is he
did not know about amino acid
fermentation and that's the missing link
in the--in Warburg's theory and that
missing link led to significant
confusion for decades and it was never
clearly recognized because many of the
enzymes in the systems were not
identified during war Warburg's time so
so there was a lot of confusion about
you know whether it was purely glucose
or or something else because people had
found cancer cells that did not respond
to glucose restriction and they said see
Otto Warburg must be wrong and that led
to confusion and then and then of course
when the genetic revolution occurred
they found all these broken chromosomes
and mutations in the tumor cell DNA
everybody ran down that path and in a
herd you know it's called groupthink and
and then that was so exciting to see all
these mutations and cancer cells leading
people to believe that that was the
origin when in fact now we have shown
and others that's it's all downstream
epi phenomena when you when you damage
the respiration they throw out all these
reactive oxygen species which lead to
the damage of DNA so the reactive oxygen
species are carcinogenic and mutagenic
so consequently everybody so many people
in the cancer field was simply studying
effects rather than causes and as the
result of that about endeavor the
results of that endeavor is that we have
today 1,600 people a day in the United
States died from cancer and they're
dying because the field is focusing on
things that aren't relevant to the
nature of the disease but it's it's sort
of like if you had a fire in your house
but you had sprinklers that put the
fight it was trying to put the fire out
and your basement flooded and so you say
it's a problem with the leaky water line
let's let's try to get these buckets out
of here and not understanding the fire
and why it's there yeah I mean I'm sure
there's a lot of you know analogies and
things that we can that we can link to
this whole problem but but you know and
then of course
we have the phenomenon of we call
escalating situations because we have
involved and invested so many hundreds
of billions of dollars into this
approach of cancer as a genetic disease
and and the infrastructures that we've
built in the major academic institutions
and Pharma pharmaceutical companies to
to say that that that that effort is
largely misplaced
despite we've just invested so much in
this we have to keep going that's what
we call an escalating situation
you throw in other words you throw good
money after bad and you keep doing that
because you have already invested so
much in this whole process and then to
realize that this is the wrong the wrong
route the wrong direction the wrong road
oh it's just it's just too difficult for
the majority of people working in the
field to accept and so it's to break it
down if we didn't cover this very
clearly with for people who may not have
picked this up but the the thigh is that
the cancer cell now is basically running
on two different fuel sources and has a
different fuel supply then it has
different instructions from the cell is
now what would be causing that and what
would be the sort of the you you said
earlier there's a way where we can have
some prevention as well as treatment
what are the things that are causing
this in the first place T to this point
yeah well so can this was called the
oncogenic paradox actually first first
defined by Albert Cink yogi a Nobel
Prize winner back in 1979 it was his
problem he said you know what is going
on here he says you can't you can get
cancer from so many different in
different ways you know viral infections
systemic inflammation radiation Karson
carcinogens chemicals that we are known
to cause cancer but there was no common
linkage by any of these provocative
agents an underlying common link and
what we have done was we've shown that
that common link is damaged to the
mitochondria in a particular population
of this particular population of cells
in a particular organ so you know
someone could be exposed to a chemical
carcinogen and that person may get you
know a liver cancer where the same
carcinogen might give
nobody else a kidney cancer the bottom
line is the carcinogen is causing cancer
by damaging mitochondria in some cells
of of an organ and and and those cells
then begin to ferment so if the
respiration is damaged by the chemical
carcinogen in order to stay alive the
cell must transfer transition its energy
from an oxidative state breathing air
and getting energy through oxidative
phosphorylation or soar ferment and as
Warburg said if the if the if the insult
is too acute it's too strong cells die
and you can't get cancer cells from dead
cells so the so the damage to the
respiration by a carcinogen or whatever
has to be gradual so that the cell has
the capability of transitioning energy
away from oxidative phosphorylation to
fermentation a fermentation metabolism
existed on the planet before oxygen came
into the atmosphere so basically these
cancer cells are simply fall anything
back on ancient pathways that existed
before oxygen came into the to the
atmosphere and and this is the day and
they entered a default state which is
proliferation so the mitochondria are
such an important organelle they keep
the cell healthy and they keep the cell
in a differentiated stable state and
when that organelle becomes damaged the
cells fall back on fermentation and that
leads them to proliferate just the day
just as they did before oxygen came into
the atmosphere all cells on the planet
were highly proliferative using a
fermentation metabolism before oxygen
came into the atmosphere some two and a
half billion years ago so basically the
cancer cell is simply falling back on
these on these ancient metabolic
pathways and the results are are met our
unbridled proliferation and if you pull
the plug on the fermentable fuels which
are primarily glucose and glutamine the
cells die right so the whole the whole
system becomes not that complicated and
so obviously this is you know there's
two separate conversations that I think
something can happen when I think
a'somethin stuff one is treatment and I
think they you've done a lot of work in
that arena but another one is maybe just
asking the question then if
mitochondrial dysfunction is what leads
us in the first place what have we done
in this field as far as researching
mitochondrial health and
promote it we've done very little um you
know we all know that if we if we diet
and exercise and don't smoke and don't
drink and all this kind of stuff I mean
we we're supposed to get a lot healthier
we reduced risks but we don't we not
every we live in a risky environment all
of us every one of us on the planet we
live in a risky environment and we make
decisions about things and as I've
written in my book the the to read
significantly reduce the risk of cancer
you reduce risk of damage to your
mitochondria now sometimes we can do
that
you know I'm not sure if you know viral
infections you know hepatitis C virus
and papilloma viruses and these things
you know they they enter your body and
they damaged mitochondria you can get
liver cancer or different kinds of
different kinds of cancers from viral
infections and but again it comes
through the mitochondria if you avoid if
you can avoid viral infections you can
avoid cancers caused by by viruses you
you know if you avoid being exposed to
radiation you can you can avoid the
damage that radiation would do to
mitochondria in a particular population
of cells if you can avoid systemic
inflammation all right so there's a link
between obesity and inflammation and
cancer I mean this is very clear people
know about this so you'd say well how do
I reduce systemic inflammation well you
you reduce blood sugar blood sugar
sustains inflammation and inflammation
can damage respiration and a population
themselves we can go down through the
entire list now one thing we can't
really do too much about is age and
cancer is more prominent in older people
than younger people and just being on
the planet for many decades puts you at
risk for damage to respiration and a
particular population of cells but but
there are ways that you can enhance the
function of your mitochondria and that's
one of them is burning ketones so how do
you burn ketones well you go under
fasting or you take low carbohydrate
diets all that will reduce risk to
damage to mitochondria and it's just
this person personal choice and I think
it's it's so confusing for so many
people because this is not an area of
health that we typically focus on there
are so many things that can
and there are no ways to assess it
really I mean there's a fringe ways you
can kind of approximate mitochondrial
function there's not really any like you
know it's not you can go in like people
try your blood work and says oh your
mitochondria are functioning you know X
percent yeah but you can you you can use
the glucose ketone index to get as a
biomarker to put to know whether your
not your health whether your
mitochondria are going to be burning
ketones or not and that's what we
published the paper on that okay so it's
a revenue explainin so for Bill who
donors in glucose ketone index basically
just a very easy proxy where you divide
glucose by ketones and the so you're
saying that this is sort of a way to
approximate mitochondrial function and
not just metabolism and what fuel
sources you're using yeah it's well it's
an indirect way because we know that
when mitochondria burn ketones the
amount of reactive oxygen species that
they produce is significantly lower and
we also get more what we call energetic
bang for the buck and this was all
worked out in a very sophisticated
biochemical procedures by Richard Veatch
at the National Institutes of Health and
a number of other individuals but when
mitochondria burned ketones they get
healthy and they get healthy because
they they're more energetic and they
produce fewer of these reactive oxygen
species during their metabolism so that
itself basically delays entropy the
second law of thermodynamics which is
disorder so by burning ketones you
reduce metabolic disorder and therefore
keep the system at a higher rate of
efficiency you know and you can use the
glucose ketone index as a means to know
this so um and a lot of number of people
are on the web you know looking at their
G K we call it the g ki so if you have a
ji ki glucose ketone index so you simply
measure there's a meters now that are
available from precision extra and keto
mojo that you can buy them on through
Amazon and and they give you one strip
will tell you what what the glucose is
and another strip will tell you what the
ketones are and it and of course the
glucose comes
the form of milligrams per dekaliter
whereas the ketones come in millimolar
people say why what's going on
well you have to make a division and
bring them both to millimolar and then
you can get the ratio but there's
actually writing that glucose by 18
roughly yes yes it's not so simple but
some people get flustered keto mojo just
built a meter now which converts the
glucose and into a gki right away so you
just push the button and you get your
number and so that makes the division
you don't even need to divide by 18
anymore for glucose so so you can just
push the button and you can get your G
ki and a child people are challenged
they say oh wow how healthy can you get
let me see what your G ki is you know
and and you go or you can do it by
therapeutic fasting you know you just
stop eating it with foot it's not easy I
believe believe me I'm not sitting here
telling people hey just once I mean but
that's the best way to get your blood
sugar down and your ketones up as a
species you know we evolved to starve
our existence on this planet was because
we could go long periods of time without
food we involved in a very food
restricted environment unlike what we've
had what we have today and we have all
these you know these degenerative
diseases linked to the abundance of
poorly nutritious high carbohydrate
foods it's killin it's killing and
making so many of us sick but you know
we didn't evolve in that kind of an
atmosphere we were always had low G K
eyes through our evolutionary past you
know but now some people say well I want
to go back to the old days the ancient
period that well how would I get my G
what would I need to do well you know
you can avoid you know carbohydrate
foods and you can bring your Sugar's
down and your ketones up with exercising
and then you measure your G ki you know
and we said if you could get it near
11.0 I mean you're really in therapeutic
ketosis and that state will keep your
mitochondria very healthy and that will
reduce significant your risk for not
only cancer but you know other chronic
diseases cardiovascular disease type 2
diabetes can cure type 2 diabetes with
metabolic therapy you don't need any
drugs so they just have to bite the
bullet on personal discipline so for
example for when people is that I talked
a lot of people about this type of stuff
and I think yeah a lot of your research
shows that a lot of Sarah
he said his around 1.0 and I see a lot
of people when they started doing diet
they had their ketones ramped up but
then it come more efficient at burning
because out of their bloodstream and
they the ketones going to their cells
and actually are utilized for energy
more so is there sort of a proxy for
when people dip off of that and go down
so for instance like if I've been on a
ketogenic diet for and working out doing
a lot of strength training especially
for months at a time
my millimolar of BHP my blood is is you
know roughly point eight to one whereas
if I am switching back and forth you
know ketosis often going back in my
level to be higher because my body's not
used to using that as energy is there
any sort of proxy there that you've seen
or a change over time with you'll get
actually keto adapted yeah well I'd
certainly the case I mean my colleague
Don D'Agostino was is always
experimenting with these kinds of
situations you know he's he's pretty
much in ketosis all the time but it can
up and down like you like you've
indicated it can vary but your body does
become adapted and becomes much more
energetically efficient cells just over
times like getting in shape you know you
always say well well you know I got to
run a marathon I got to get in shape
well if you're gonna do you know
therapeutic ketosis it takes time it
takes it takes time for the body to
readjust to these new these new
physiological states but at least you
have the G ki as kind of a biomarker to
let you know where where you were and
where you need to go with more and then
yeah so number so I'm assuming people
maybe they're hearing this like they say
oh man I want to prevent cancer as much
as possible I wanna get my GTI to one I
mean is this the the best thing that
they can focus on well I think it's the
easiest thing they can focus on it also
is a challenge and they also know how
difficult it might be just like someone
would say I think I want to run a
marathon a Boston Marathon well well
you're not just gonna go out without
practice and just run the marathon you
know you're gonna be really dragon so
but I think with some degree of practice
you can get your G K eyes down into
these zones you you got you'll find the
foods that will that will maintain low
low carbs into your body and your body
gradually starts to pick up the the keto
the ketosis I just want to point out
though
for normal healthy folks you can get
into these zones pretty pretty easily I
once I don't know I don't want to say
easy you can get into these zones with
not extreme difficulty on the cancer
patient on the other hand has far
greater difficulty getting into these
zones than the normal healthy people and
a lot of that has to do what we found
with with anxiety fear factors some of
the treatments they're on and all these
kinds of things it prevents it preclude
Coase hi you know you'd be stress
emotions think threats keeps blood sugar
high it's so hard for the cancer
patients to get into the so-called
really healthy therapeutic ketosis zones
especially if they're being treated with
radiation and chemo ins and these kinds
of things it really puts so much stress
on the body it becomes a Herculean
effort to get into these healthy states
not that they can't it's just that it
requires far more persistence and effort
and it would be for a healthy person
yeah I mean I haven't even thought about
that condition much I aware continuous
blood glucose monitor pre often and even
when I'm stressed at work my average of
you can jump by 20 points for a whole
day or two days and so and that's just
me working that's not me
grappling with the fact that I have
cancer and I don't know what to do and
I'm under all this physical stress as
well and then so kind of bridging the
gap here talking about the setting the
stage for prevention is just treating
your mitochondria right keeping it
healthy it's entirely different destruct
discussion a huge problem that you're
focusing on as well is the treatment in
K now let's say you do have some of
these mitochondria that have now
transitioned over a long period of time
into cancerous cells that are
proliferating the question then is what
do we do to stop this proliferation and
so at this point probably how you
describe and correct me if I'm off base
here is that we have we've look at the
fuel system so how is this how is this
mask growing how is it moving well
obviously you need energy input to have
an output of growth right and so you're
you're saying that you know Warburg
showed that glucose in was a big fuel
source we were we were sort of missing
something and now you're saying that
glutamine is another way that we can
use this and in ferment glutamine itself
as far as pushing the growth forward and
yeah SME as a spore year we're at yeah
that's exactly where we're at so we just
published a big paper in communications
biology my chief associate doctor
Poorna Mukerji where we targeted
simultaneously glucose and glutamine you
need drugs to target glutamine because
it's not it's not you can't manage it
effectively with diet so actually before
before we dip into those new findings
when people now are on key agenda I
think they understand that you your
blood glucose doesn't drop to zero I you
know you GI doesn't go to infinity and
so the question at that point is that
you know are you going to have through a
bunch of different process in your
body's gluconeogenesis in in others
you're gonna have some glucose around
but that doesn't go to zero so the
concern to have glucose as a fuel I mean
is this why friends resistance training
is is so great when undergoing treatment
of cancer because it's sort of up
regulates the like with four
transporters and crates of glucose sink
and pulls it away from the cancer cells
or harder how do we shift the balance of
fuel yeah yeah yeah we publish that yeah
I showed that because when you start to
reduce the sugar for the body normal
cells compete now directly with the
cancer cells so you're using your normal
cells as part of this as part of the
solution to the problem for the first
time you're asking normal cells of your
body to you to come together and and up
regulate glucose because we did that we
put my son on some of these very
restricted glucose conditions and we saw
elevation of gluten transporters and the
normal cells go up when we ask in the
real so that means they're there they're
down there in direct competition with
the tumor cell that normal cells can
burn either ketones or glucose the tumor
cell can only burn the glucose so so
you're you're you're competing the
normal cells are competing for the fuel
that will keep the tumor cells alive the
normal cells can also burn the ketones
so they can stay alive using either
glucose or ketones so when you were
doing that since they'll want the
ketones a little bit lower so that way
your body puts to use in a
COMPETES the cancer cells for glucose
well these are very good questions and
this is where the cutting edge is right
now when I'm working with my my
clinician colleagues in translating the
information that we have from the
research and they in the in the lab with
the animals and how we transition these
different different strategies to two
people you know how low can you close
your you push your blood sugar how high
should you push your ketones um you know
for how long we don't only use this let
me let me start by saying the first
thing we do the first thing we would
like to do in the clinic when someone
would beat would be diagnosed with any
kind of a cancer is we do a
comprehensive blood work because it
turns out that many people with cancer
also have many other metabolic
imbalances it's unbelievable so um there
you know if you look at their blood work
a lot of things are out of whack
you know LDL HDL triglycerides you know
you can have C reactive protein you fire
ferritin levels you know all these
different kinds of levels are indicators
of overall health status and not and
many times not always but we see some
cancer patients are all out of whack
with these biomarkers so so biomarkers
of health of course so we have to know
where the individual is before we where
we know as to where we are going
so as we first transition this
individual off the high sugar and all
this other stuff he brings the whole
body into a new state of health
now that already will shrink tumors and
I will already slow down cancer growth
once we get the person into therapeutic
ketosis then we begin to go after the
glutamine and we begin to put maximum
metabolic stress on the tumor with
that's why we use hyperbaric oxygen my
colleague Don D'Agostino is really big
on this we can kill tumor cells using
excessive oxidative stress rather than
radiation so once you pull away the
fermentable fuels that protect the tumor
cell from radiation and chemo now they
become extremely vulnerable to oxidative
stress created by hyperbaric oxygen okay
and so would you
for instance took a three day fast going
into that and then go aggressive at the
end of the fast with hyperbaric oxygen
what is the well let me think yeah what
we think
we'll be is is what we do is we we
transition the patient first off to a
low carbohydrate diet before we do
therapeutic fasting it's a transition
from a low carb diet or a ketogenic diet
into water only therapeutic fasting the
transition is much easier than going the
reverse you know is going cold turkey on
the food it's very very hard as drill
it's after three days man you ready to
chew chew paint you know I mean it's
it's not it's not easy so but the
transition going from saying okay well
I'm eating a balanced you know
carbohydrate diet and whatever so you
gradually reduce the carbs to almost as
low as you possibly can get for maybe a
week or more and then you can see the
blood sugar going down and the ketones
going up so the person is naturally
going into a into a state of therapeutic
ketosis and then you can do a water only
fast or a few days in there and it
becomes far far less stressful on the
body then once the person is in this
good state of therapeutic ketosis then
we can start hammering the glutamine we
use drugs for that and hyperbaric oxygen
and the goal of course is to gradually
degrade the tumor slowly while
maintaining a high health status of the
body and an overall quality of life so
at no time should this patient have to
suffer any kind of a very toxic approach
you know there's like we're we're
eliminating the toxic effects and we're
keeping these people very healthy and we
and we want these people to emerge from
the treatment far healthier than when
they started
not like death warmed over like you see
today with the treatments that given
these poor people so we are where the
goal is to stop the proliferation of
cells that are fundamentally fermenting
and you know we don't need radiation or
chemo toxic chemo to do that we just
have to know how to pull the strings on
the metabolism of the cell but you have
to do it gradually so you don't cause
any harm or toxicity to the guy so
you're saying okay so we have glucose
and glutamine so glucose we talked about
strength training can pull some stuff in
there switch into a low carbohydrate
diet and then anything else that you
would recommend as far as lifestyle
changes that could help balance the
glucose from the the
answer cells to the rest of the body
well I mean I think we use we use the
ambiguity here comes when people say can
I eat this can I do that can I do this
you know and everybody has a different
story because we're all physiologically
a little bit different from each other
and we use the gki indexes to let people
know say some guy can eat something and
it really throws the index out of whack
and another guy can eat the same thing
it doesn't do anything right so so every
individual is unique and they have to
have their own meter they look at their
own data and they share that with their
with their healthcare provider that
understands what what's going on and you
know Miriam Colombian who you said you
interviewed you know she's helped so
many so many cancer patients you know
maintained in the so called therapeutic
zone and you know and we're developing
the kinds of drugs that would work
together with the metabolic state to
destroy these tumor cells so it's it's
not just one approach what we have here
we have entire metabolic reconfiguration
of the body that will involve dietary
changes used together with procedures
and drugs that target and kill the tumor
cells in a non-toxic way we are
absolutely convinced that this works
we've seen it work in many many
different patients with all kinds of
different cancers in fact as I said
cancer is a singular disease it's not a
hundred diseases there if you have
bladder cancer colon cancer brain cancer
breast cancer the cells are all
fermenting and they are the most
abundant fuels are glucose and glutamine
so the strategy to kill cancer is not
that complicated and and many people
simply can't believe that because of the
enormous investment we have made in the
approaches that we're using today making
it system like it's infinitely
complicated and it is when you look at
it from a genetic perspective but when
you look at it from a metabolic
perspective it's a very simple disease
so the recent thought you had about
glutamine being a fuel source here is it
something that it proof cancer cell
would prefer glucose and then when you
start taking that away with low
carbohydrate diets and all these other
things we talked about that it starts
hedging more towards glutamine as more
readily available fuel source or how
does it choose or sort of an M
in the US process no it's it's first of
all the cancer cell doesn't doesn't
prefer anything it just uses what's
available in the environment to fuel to
fuel the fermentation because without
fermentation it's it's it's dead so and
as a matter of fact just comes down to
enter basic energy you know without
energy nothing can live so so every
every cell acquires energy through the
process of metabolism you either get it
from from glucose through oxidative
phosphorylation in normal cells and the
waste products of course are water and
co2 in normal cells the cancer cells
they they can't use that part of their
metabolism has been corrupted by any
number of means as I mentioned to you
already any number of things can corrupt
the ability of the mitochondria to get
energy through ox fox so what does that
leave them to get how are they going to
survive and grow without energy they
need energy and that energy comes from
from glucose and glutamine and yeah
there are some cancers where you can
pull away all the glucose and they're
still there still thrive and and they're
thriving on the glutamine and there are
some cancers that that use mostly
glucose but the majority of cancers use
both only because glutamine and glucose
are the two most abundant fuels in the
tumor microenvironment I mean there are
other amino acids in the environment
that can fuel a cancer cell the problem
is they're very little there's much less
logistics it's a logistic supply issue
so if I'm gonna run an inefficient
metabolism I better have a large amount
of fuel available to run this
inefficient metabolism because it's not
efficient therefore there's a logistic
issue where am I going to get the fuel
to run an inefficient system and the
answer is the fuel is readily about
available as a matter of fact we just
published the paper is showing in brain
cancer how the radiation and chemo of
people with brain cancer free up massive
amounts of glutamine and glucose in the
micro environment which ultimately leads
further to the rapid demise of these
poor people in other words the very
therapies that are being used to treat
glioblastoma are contributing to the
death of the patients not only just the
tumor the very treatments themselves and
this can explain in large way
in large part why so few people that
survived they survived because the very
treatments are freeing up massive
amounts of glucose and glutamine so the
tumors are always going to be growing so
I mean and this explains it was a very
big paper we just published on this
whole thing and so I I think that a lot
of people might not understand so that
they think glutamine meal though they
have some connection to food and
nutrition I think ok I'll just eat stop
eating protein can that contain the
glutamine
not that simple I was in yeah I know
it's not that simple
the body can make glutamine from other
but that's why it's called a
non-essential because the body can make
it from from things you know our muscles
are loaded with glutamine you know part
of the cachexia that people get loss of
weight despite the fact that they might
be eating as the muscles release
glutamine into the micro environment and
this can find its way to the cancer so
so you need a drug we need we need
specific drugs we've we've shown that
this is glutamine antagonist six-days
own or oxy Laursen or leucine which is
called do and on really does a good job
in in depriving that cells of glutamine
but it works so much better under
therapeutic ketosis so so a therapeutic
ketosis not only not only works together
with the drugs but it also facilitates
drug to target and so there's a lot of
things that we need to know but the
basic outline and the basic framework is
in place and I think it will it's going
to take time before the oncology field
recognizes number one cancer is not a
genetic disease it's a metabolic disease
and number two you know how best do we
treat patients using this new paradigm
and this is obviously going to take some
time but once people understand it and
they realize how powerful it is and how
effective it is I think it's just it's
just common sense that this is going to
happen right so obviously the the non
essential glutamine is from Nike so your
body can make it but still your body
needs it so would you just pop this drug
in there every now and then to do sort
of a targeted approach to it - not the
probably already completely Lumine in
disruption or how do you know you're a
hundred percent right this is what this
is what we call the and
in our big paper we published called
press pulse a novel strategy was this
exactly what you just said you know
we're still in them as I said we
understand the framework we understand
the concepts we just have to work dosage
timing and scheduling you're absolutely
right
glutamine is such an important amino
acid it runs our gut it runs our immune
system it runs the urea cycles I mean we
have a lot of physiological things going
on that require glutamine so we just
can't go in there like a bull in the
china shop in addition rip out all the
glutamine because you're going to harm
the body so it has to be done
strategically it has to be pulsed and
used under certain conditions in certain
ways and this is what we're working on
right now you know this is what people
say well this is not sexy science no
it's not it's it's not sexy science but
it will actually resolve the disease if
done correctly so um and I think that's
the ultimate goal isn't the ultimate
goal to resolve the disease without
toxicity right the the the issue is
dosage timing and scheduling and this is
what we're this is the cutting edge
right now and once we've figured this
out on the preclinical systems we can
then immediately translate this into the
into the clinic we're doing that now in
patients but with my colleagues in
different in different countries but
we're still not there with respect to
the issues that you just rose these are
very important issues that need to be
need to be worked out but we can this is
we can do this this is is not an
insurmountable problem and so is this
sort of a mechanism the glutamine
production that what people say that or
it's commonly held that you should
reduce a lot of protein consumption when
you're doing any sort of cancer
treatment regardless of chemotherapy or
not or are there other mechanisms here
that we don't want to feel like cancer
growth through through that oricon a I'm
pretty much only as a fuel source be
using glucose or glutamine yeah no no
this is this is an important issue
because T Colin Campbell had published
some interesting papers and rat tumors
where protein content under a certain
level was therapeutic but when you
reached a certain threshold where went
over it could stimulate tumor growth and
and you have to realize that you know
the many of these proteins are broken
down and they to glucose they glucose a
your their fuel for gluconeogenesis so
you can you can take
the carbon structure of protein break it
down to amino acids and and glean
produced glue to me a glucose from that
so I'm still not sure yet whether you
know taking glutamine as part of the
diet there's a lot of cancer that's
interesting enough a lot of cancer
patients are so beat up by the toxic
therapies they're there they take
high-dose glutamine to recover their gut
function and you know we're not yet sure
whether whether that's going to be
provocative to any surviving tumor cell
we and it's another interesting you can
do hyperbaric oxygen insurance companies
cover hyperbaric oxygen to recover the
damage from excessive radiation to the
body but they don't use they will not
cover hyperbaric oxygen to actually kill
tumor cells like we it's kind of a crazy
system so I'd be yeah I'd be interested
to see for instance if the argument is
that reduce protein intakes that way you
don't have supply of glutamine or even
glucose through gluconeogenesis and all
these other factors what I mean
how much did you body release into your
bloodstream when you're when you're
cachexia can start losing muscle mass
and then like yeah good point good point
we we we know we know a lot of that goes
to the tumor cells and that's what the
tumor cells are sucking out your that's
why you're you you know cachexia
cachexia is is weight loss because of a
pathological situation the tumor cell
the tumor is using energy from the body
to grow at the expense of muscle and
other tissues so your your it's a path
and as a matter of fact blood sugar and
keep an insulin are high under cachexia
can you believe this now under
therapeutic ketosis when you stop eating
or when you're doing these you know a
calorie restricted ketogenic diets
insulin and blood sugar go way down so
that's what we call therapeutic body
weight loss it says it's a therapeutic
state whereas cachexia is a pathological
state so people you know have to realize
body weight loss can be very therapeutic
and once in one context but very
pathological in another and of course
many cancer patients unfortunately a
poison that irradiated and when I say
poison the drugs that they use these
chemo therapeutic drugs are actually
poisons
you know they poured it in the body they
killed tumor cells too but they poison
your body and and of course you lose
weight I mean you're sick you're
vomiting you've diarrhea all these are
all indirect forms of calorie
restriction but it's you're causing harm
to the body and the weight loss is
pathological this is very different than
therapeutic weight loss so people have
to get over this idea that you know
weight loss is always bad you know
weight loss can be powerfully
therapeutic when done under the right
context so all of these things have to
be have to be adjusted and you know
getting back to the two fuels glucose
and glutamine a lot of people a lot many
people have said oh no cancer cells can
burn fat so in order to burn fat you
have to have healthy mitochondria
mitochondria are beta oxidized fats are
beta oxidized in the mitochondria and
they generate energy through oxidative
phosphorylation but people say well I
know cancer cells burn fat because I to
them to the animal and and and and the
tumors grew faster or people and I said
well there's also a lot of glucose you
have around and there's evidence to show
clearly that high-fat diets not high fat
fat fat itself can force the tumor to
take in more glucose and glutamine
through it through through alternative
mechanisms so it appears that the fats
are making the tumor grow faster but if
you have a significant amount of glucose
and glutamine the fat will make the
tumor use more glucose and glutamine but
not directly so people have to realize
the tumor cells can only burn glucose
and glutamine and we went through this
in a big paper and showed that any other
amino acid you have to invest energy to
get energy whereas glutamine is pure
gold energy for that cell you don't have
to metabolize anything it just goes
right right through the glute
ammonolysis pathway and generates
massive energy inside the mitochondria
through a fermentation mechanism so you
shot the door on the glutamine and you
shut the door on the glucose most of
those cells up and died very quickly so
and they had set the normal cells get
very healthy so this is the strategy and
as you mentioned if you do it right and
you do it with the right dosage timing
and scheduling you can degrade and Demma
and demolish these tumor cells quite
effectively without harming the rest of
the body and you know people want want
the
like this right and so to that point you
just made would you recommend only a
calorie restricted keeping a diet
certainly not a one with calorie
surpluses yeah well I found in both the
Epilepsy was very interesting years ago
John Freeman the late John Freeman the
the the one of the founders of the whole
ketogenic diet for epilepsy thing he
told me we had a conversation when Danny
said Tom when we over we find a kid who
really likes ketogenic diets we can't
manage his seizures it doesn't work so I
found that to be a very interesting
observation everything no to it's one
out of 400 kids just loves the poor keto
oil all over everything and he's always
he's got massive amounts so we did it in
the mouse we gave mice as much keto as
they could have and we found they got
insulin insensitivity and high blood
sugar so um clearly too much of this
stuff is again you had it's a medicine
it's it's like any medicine if you don't
use it correctly you can have effects
that are not quite as a the approach is
not quite as effective
so most people humans you know they're
not interested in eating massive amounts
of ketogenic diet because the high fat
in their blood triggers the eighth
cranial nerve which controls your
appetite so your appetite gets reduced
so you know overall you're not consuming
as much as you normally do and some mice
have this some mice tone so we always
recommend calorie restricted ketogenic
diet as long as you can get into
therapeutic ketosis you should be okay
but again if you eat too much of this
you get insulin insensitivity and high
blood sugar which can contribute to the
tumor growth so again we're working out
these protocols now that will be adapted
for cancer patients and it makes things
a little bit easier if we can follow the
the pathway for ideal body metabolism so
it's it's a work in progress so
interesting question that I have is that
you mentioned before how people can for
instance in the seizure pathway that you
know as soon as they eat drink a coke or
eat a slice of pizza they didn't have a
seizure again it's not a complete fix in
this stuff as far as these cancerous
cells let's say you're doing this press
pulse therapy for all
time it shows that you're totally good
everything you know complete remission
and then you you drink a soda eat a
pizzas is everything to come flaring
back again in the same sort of parallel
to the epilepsy no it will not and and
also there's several reasons so you have
to realize most of the people that are
taking ketogenic diets for epilepsy are
children and the parents are that over
Overseers
and they are rigidly compliant why
because no one wants to see their child
going through an epileptic seizure it's
a it's a traumatic kind of event for the
child and for everyone in the room so
the parents know they keep those kids
really compliant so they don't have to
watch their child have a seizure and
cancer you don't see that at all you
can't see a group of cells growing
because you decided to have a coke you
don't see the same visual effects of
that in some internal tissue or organ so
um so you don't really know but we think
that it doesn't nearly happen as quickly
you can't grow a whole bunch of cells
real real quick like you can have a blow
what they call a breakthrough seizure
which is obvious so no we don't you know
we have patients that are people that
are you know compliance and every now
and then they might have a pizza with
water or a pizza with red wine is a
certain count alcoholic drinks that
don't raise blood sugar so um but you
know if people want to stay alive they
want to get get control of their of
their of their tumor and they want to
get control of their life you know they
they pretty maintain but but I have to
be honest with you the human nature is
amazing we have people that tell us oh
yeah I'm really really compliant I'm
really really and then we look at their
blood work and it's out of whack there's
no way they could be compliant so what
they do is they lie they lie to
themselves and they lie to them just
something to make them to make somebody
say oh yeah you're doing a good job so
but when you're dealing with a
glioblastoma or you know advanced lung
cancer I mean there's not much wiggle
room here I mean you want to stay alive
you got to kill those tumor cells you
got to be compliant compliance is it is
a problem for any kind of a medicine I
mean there's a lot of people taking
radiation
quemo that not aren't compliant either
so compliance always represents a
challenge if you if you really want to
get complete control over the disease
you're working with right I mean you
found the one this dawn to be effective
at dealing with glooming pathway I'm you
know you guys adding in stuff like
dichloro acetate o3 Burma pyruvate or
anything like that to modify even more
glucose pathway with the pyruvate
modifications alright yeah I think these
are these are possibilities I mean it's
it's you know scientists we we have to
be very careful about how we mix and
match the drugs just like you would do
for any particular approach you know
which drug and we got to be careful
because if we do do it too aggressively
we get again harm harm body because you
start screwing with too many systems
simultaneously so we we're trying to
work in very low doses of these of these
kinds of drugs to work synergistically
with the with the diet state status as I
said this is the cutting edge this this
is the where we need to be supported in
doing these kinds of things because
ultimately what we're doing is is
defining the new protocol for cancer
management and yes I mean we can use
supplementary drugs and procedures that
would work together to further reduce
glucose or the metabolic pathways that
are involved but you know we have to do
this very very carefully again to avoid
any kind of a damage or impede 'men of
the of the entire process and most of
this is basically trial and error that's
why we call it non still on sexy science
only because a lot of it involves trial
and error but but ultimately the end
result is that you will have a protocol
that will be effective in managing the
majority of cancers without toxicity and
I think there's there's a certain
motivation to want to do that so if
somebody's listening to this podcast
house cancer wants to be treated in this
way and not go through the wringer like
they have been I'm sure they go to their
primary care physician or oncologist and
explain this to them and they'll think
there's psychopath
is your clinic the only one that's doing
this type of stuff or where where should
people go what should they do and this
is all first yeah well first of all I
don't have a clinic yeah
the clinic that I'm a professor at
Boston College so we don't we don't even
have a medical school here but but we we
work with with people and like in in
Istanbul Turkey where they were the
first major group to embrace the concept
of metabolic therapy from the book that
I wrote and they're getting rather
remarkable success on using combinations
of chemo drugs at low doses with
hyperthermia hyperbaric oxygen
restricted ketogenic diets the whole
thing and the patients are doing in
general they're doing far better than
most of the other clinics yeah you know
what you touched upon is probably one of
the most difficult situations and
frustrating situations and that is
people listen to what I have to say or
what some of my colleagues have to say
and they run down to their top medical
school and their or their oncologists
and they say well this can't be right
because I would have learned it in
medical school and you know they're not
would have learned it's not their fault
they've just simply we're never trained
to understand that cancer is a metabolic
disease they were not trained to
understand Warburg otto warburg central
concepts and therefore the very people
that are supposed to provide the service
to the patient are clueless as to the
why we're doing this in the first place
and they're all fear weight loss they're
it's it's the training of the physicians
that needs to change and I feel bad for
all these cancer patients because
because they're running to there and
they get and they get discouraged and
told that this doesn't work but what
doesn't work where's the evidence that
is it I'll show you papers that it does
work you know but they just don't read
the literature they're not they're not
on top of the scientific literature I
mean a lot of people continue to treat
patients with Avastin now Avastin was
pulled off the markets an
anti-angiogenic drug and it was pulled
off the market for breast cancer because
it didn't work and it was harming people
and you know they still give it to brain
cancer patients and other patients with
other cancers and we know that the tumor
cell that will kill you doesn't care
about angiogenesis and will grow faster
with Avastin yet they continue to give
people a vest and they don't read the
scientific literature yeah you know it's
just it's very
frustrating to see what we're doing to
all these cancer patients based on a
fundamental lack of knowledge on the
biology of the very disease that we're
treating so so I don't know it's it's
gonna take a time for this whole thing
to pass I mean immunotherapies they work
great on some people but they're they
they don't work and they could kill
other people faster than the disease
itself so so I mean and but it's based
on the gene theory so when you say to
the oncologist are you giving me a
treatment based on the metabolic theory
of cancer or the genetic theory of
cancer they should give you an honest
answer and if they can't then you have
to say well what is this guy treating me
for if he doesn't understand the biology
of the problem do you have any rogue
oncologists in the US that you know of
or do you vocalists somewhere it's
something we can't discuss because if
positions don't follow the standard of
care they can lose their license and
therefore there's a tremendous
frustration on the part of the
physicians who actually understand the
concepts but are not able to to
administer this for fear that they there
be treating patients with therapies that
don't that are not sanctioned you know
I've spoke I would just came back from
from Switzerland where we we had a big
meeting on metabolic therapies for all
kinds of diseases including cancer and
one of my physician friends treated a
woman with stage 4 metastatic breast
cancer with metabolic therapy and she
did remarkably well I mean this tumor
shrunk the she was very healthy three
years out she's doing really well and he
was excited to present this to the the
oncology group in Switzerland he was
vilified and because he didn't follow
the standard of care and and the bottom
but the patient is doing remarkably well
the fact that the patient was doing
remarkably well was inconsequential to
the fact that the fact that he chose to
treat someone with a non-sanctioned
procedure and had anything gone wrong he
would have been thrown in jail
so not the fact that this woman is doing
really well but the fact that he didn't
follow the instructions so it's okay for
people to die through an officially
sanctioned procedure then rather to save
the patient's life through an
alternative procedure can you
leave this it's crazy so what if you
were to diagnose the cancer tomorrow
would you just go to Istanbul and work
at that clinic it would be your approach
well of course I you know we developed a
lot of the things and even though we did
this I still like to consult with a
physician that knows you know the in the
in and outs of actually treating
somebody um I would know the concepts I
certainly you know would would follow
what we've said but nevertheless I would
still like to talk to someone who who
would be you know we don't want to go
out and everybody just treat themselves
you got to have a professional that
understands the situation and can make
recommendations that you in your present
state may not have thought about and and
and I think that's always yeah I know
exactly what I should do if I were to
get cancer but I still need a
professional to talk about what I plan
to do just so I would talk about with
him and something went this way or that
way we would have a conversation about
what direction should should we go in
now I understand that the majority of
people who might have cancer
need to rely on their on their caregiver
with 100% confidence and for many
diseases in many situations that's
absolutely essential but when it comes
to cancer we have sixteen hundred people
a day dying and in China is eight
thousand people a day dying so clearly
we have an unrecognized epidemic of
people dying from cancer so obviously
there's some serious problem in the
entire system that needs to be changed
radically
I mean it sounds like you're getting a
lot of physicians that are coming to you
and saying hey I really want to do this
or I've tried it out and it's work you
just they can't expand their scope or be
very vocal about it yeah well sometimes
they can sometimes they can't but you're
absolutely right I I'm what we're trying
to work on a global society for
metabolic therapy with physicians that
are being trained as quickly as possible
and trying to establish an alternative
standard of care based on on solid
concepts of metabolic approaches but the
issue of course is is is that we have to
have a very powerful training session we
need to develop a protocol that's going
to be adapted by the by the
ERD of oncology clinics and that are
going to be utilized for the majority of
cancer patients
so there's a whole infrastructural
system that needs to be put into place
but you're a hundred percent correct
most physicians have an intrinsic desire
to heal and help their patients and I
think when they see the power of what
metabolic therapy can do they get so
excited about this and this is truly the
art of practicing medicine because you
can tweak things here and there and make
the patient actually come into a better
physiological state and and this is what
physicians do rather than what we do
today is we just you know sit people
down and inject them with a with a
certain dosage of poison that's not
that's strong enough to kill tumor but
not kill the patient and or just to
radiate some part of their body
you know once once one size fits all and
and that's that's gonna be history in
the future because we can't continue to
what we've been doing it doesn't work
for them many people and and I'm not
saying that standards of care today are
completely ineffectual they are many
people are walking around today their
so-called cancer survivors but many or
if not most of those people have paid a
serious price for their new new state of
remission their bodies have been beat to
hell by radiation and toxic poisons they
now have all color other kinds of health
issues that they didn't have but for the
fact that they survive poison and
radiation or some other kinds of toxic
approach so people pay a price for their
for their survival and we think we can
manage this whole disease quite
effectively without toxicity if we if we
apply the right strategies dosage and
timing with these metabolic therapies
and so I think there's a lot of work to
do Tom
yeah well I mean we're on the right path
we just you know we just yeah there's a
lot of work to be done but there's more
work to be done in the infrastructure
and approach than it is in the
scientific approach instinct well well a
lot of solutions out there thanks for
taking the time I really really
appreciate it and working folks find
your work and maybe where you're active
online well we we published most of our
papers and open access journals also on
the CrossFit website I've put in some
been requested to put in some major
discussions about can
there is a metabolic disease so the
CrossFit if you can go on there and sees
stuff on cancer but most of our papers
are published in open access journals
people go online and see this and if
anybody would like to support the work
that we do
Travis Kristofferson who published
tripping over the truth a very excellent
book on the cancer the cancer metabolic
issue he has a foundation called the
foundation for metabolic therapies and
that money is donated to Boston College
through a grant system at the University
so that supports our our research
individuals donate to Travis's
foundation and then the foundation so
because I'd be honest with you it's very
very difficult to get funding for things
that actually can resolve the disease
but if you can get millions and millions
of dollars to study gene signaling
pathways related to the disease or
something that will may not have direct
clinical relevance you get a lot of
money for those kinds of things but
actually trying to resolve cancer very
hard to get money especially if it
doesn't involve some some toxic drug or
some immuno immunotherapy or something
like this so to let people know that you
know you have an idea but you know to
get that idea to flush down it requires
funds and and and funding this kind of
stuff has been very very difficult well
thanks very keen all the work you do
yeah thank you alright everyone thanks
for listening to another episode of the
keto answers podcast I hope you enjoyed
it but even if you didn't I would love a
review just go over to iTunes wherever
you listen your podcast I'm popping in a
review so we can get found by more
people get better guests and have the
information that you need so please go
to iTunes wherever you listen your
podcast and in this review if you're new
to keto heading over to perfectly calm
slash podcast and enter your email for
all our top tips and guides on getting
started with a ketogenic diet thanks
we'll see you next time
[Applause]
[Music]